adr-047: evidence handling (#4429)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/architecture/adr-047-handling-evidence-from-light-client.md

# ADR 047: Handling evidence from light client

## Changelog
* 18-02-2020: Initial draft

## Context

If the light client is under attack (either directly - lunatic / phantom
validators or indirectly - fork on the main chain), it's supposed to halt and
send an evidence of misbehavior to the correct full node. Upon receiving an
evidence, full node should punish malicious validators (if possible).

## Decision

When a light client sees two conflicting headers (`H1.Hash() != H2.Hash()`,
`H1.Height == H2.Height`), both having 1/3+ of voting power of the currently
trusted validator set, it will submit a `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` to all
full nodes it's connected to.

```go
type ConflictingHeadersEvidence struct {
  H1 *types.SignedHeader
  H2 *types.SignedHeader
}
```

When a full node receives the `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` evidence, it should
a) validate it b) figure out if malicious behaviour is obvious (immediately
slashable) or the fork accountability protocol needs to be started.

(a): check both headers are valid (`ValidateBasic`), have
the same height and signed by 1/3+ of known validator set.

> - What to do if neither H1 nor H2 was committed on the main chain?

Reviewer: Is that possible if both headers are each signed by more than 1/3 of the known validator set and there are no double signings

Author: yes, see https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4182

# ADR 047: Handling evidence from light client

## Changelog
* 18-02-2020: Initial draft
* 24-02-2020: Second version

## Context

If the light client is under attack (either directly - lunatic / phantom
validators or indirectly - fork on the main chain), it's supposed to halt and

> send an evidence of misbehavior to the correct full node. Upon receiving an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
send evidence of misbehavior to a full node. Upon receiving an
```
? Not sure what correct full node means, maybe I'm missing some context

Author: correct - not malicious

Check both headers are valid (`ValidateBasic`), have
the same height and signed by 1/3+ of known validator set.

- Q: What if light client validator set is not equal to full node's validator
  set (i.e. from full node's point of view both headers are not properly signed;
  this includes the case where none of the two headers were committed on the
  main chain)

  Reject the evidence. It means light client is following a fork, but, hey, at
  least it will halt.

- Q: Don't we want to punish validators who signed something else even if they
  have less or equal than 1/3?

  No consensus so far. Ethan said no, Zarko said yes.
  https://github.com/tendermint/spec/pull/71#discussion_r374210533

### Figuring out if malicious behaviour is immediately slashable

Let's say H1 was committed on the main chain. Intersect validator sets of H1
and H2.

* if there are signers(H2) that are not part of validators(H1), they misbehaved as
they are signing protocol messages in heights they are not validators =>
immediately slashable (#F4).

* if `H1.Round == H2.Round`, and some signers signed different precommit
messages in both commits, then it is an equivocation misbehavior => immediately

> slashable (#F1).

Reviewer 2: link to what F1 is?

* if `H1.Round != H2.Round` we need to run full detection procedure => not
immediately slashable.

* if `ValidatorsHash`, `NextValidatorsHash`, `ConsensusHash`,
`AppHash`, and `LastResultsHash` in H2 are different (incorrect application

> state transition), then it is a lunatic misbehavior => immediately slashable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
state transition), then it is a lunatic misbehavior => immediately slashable (#F5).
```

If evidence is not immediately slashable, fork accountability needs to invoked
(ADR does not yet exist).

It's unclear if we should further break up `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` or
gossip and commit it directly. See
https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4182#issuecomment-590339233

If we'd go with breaking evidence, here are the types we'll need:

### F1. Equivocation

Existing `DuplicateVoteEvidence` needs to be created and gossiped.

### F4. Phantom validators

A new type of evidence needs to be created:

```go
type PhantomValidatorEvidence struct {

> 	PubKey crypto.PubKey

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  PubKey crypto.PubKey
```

`ValidatorsHash` and `NextValidatorsHash` are correct with respect to the
header that was committed at the corresponding height.

That said, if the attack is conducted by +2/3 of the validator set, they don't
need to make an invalid change to the validator set, since they already control
it. Instead they would make invalid changes to the `AppHash`, or possibly other
fields. In order to punish them, then, we would have to check all header
fields.

Note some header fields require the block itself to verify, which the light
client, by definition, does not possess, so it may not be possible to check
these fields. For now, then, `LunaticValidatorEvidence` must be checked against
all header fields which are a function of the application at previous blocks.
This includes `ValidatorsHash`, `NextValidatorsHash`, `ConsensusHash`,
`AppHash`, and `LastResultsHash`. These should all match what's in the header
for the block that was actually committed at the corresponding height, and
should thus be easy to check.

## Status

Proposed.

## Consequences

### Positive

* Tendermint will be able to detect & punish new types of misbehavior

> 

Author: light clients connected to multiple full nodes can help full nodes notice a fork faster?

# ADR 047: Handling evidence from light client

## Changelog
* 18-02-2020: Initial draft
* 24-02-2020: Second version

## Context

If the light client is under attack (either directly - lunatic / phantom

> validators or indirectly - fork on the main chain), it's supposed to halt and

Reviewer 3: Could you add here a reference to the fork accountability spec where these are defined?

Author: It's in the footer (see ## References)

> send evidence of misbehavior to the correct full node. Upon receiving an

Reviewer 3: How does the client know which is the correct node?

Author: It doesn't, which is why it sends evidence to all connected full nodes.

> send an evidence of misbehavior to the correct full node. Upon receiving an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
send evidence of misbehavior to the correct full node. Upon receiving an
```

evidence, full node should punish malicious validators (if possible).

## Decision

When a light client sees two conflicting headers (`H1.Hash() != H2.Hash()`,
`H1.Height == H2.Height`), both having 1/3+ of voting power of the currently
trusted validator set, it will submit a `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` to all
full nodes it's connected to.

```go
type ConflictingHeadersEvidence struct {
  H1 types.SignedHeader
  H2 types.SignedHeader
}
```

When a full node receives the `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` evidence, it should
a) validate it b) figure out if malicious behaviour is obvious (immediately
slashable) or the fork accountability protocol needs to be started.

### Validating headers

Check both headers are valid (`ValidateBasic`), have

> the same height and signed by 1/3+ of known validator set.

Reviewer 3: what is the "known validator set" exactly? Is the valset that the full node has for its block at same height as H1 and H2? 
Also, are the validator sets as seen by the client for H1 and H2 part of the Evidence?

Author: > Is the valset that the full node has for its block at same height as H1 and H2?

good question! it's the valset that the full node has for its block at height H1 - 1.

> Also, are the validator sets as seen by the client for H1 and H2 part of the Evidence?

no, only commit signatures (votes).

- Q: What if light client validator set is not equal to full node's validator
  set (i.e. from full node's point of view both headers are not properly signed;
  this includes the case where none of the two headers were committed on the
  main chain)

  Reject the evidence. It means light client is following a fork, but, hey, at
  least it will halt.

- Q: Don't we want to punish validators who signed something else even if they
  have less or equal than 1/3?

  No consensus so far. Ethan said no, Zarko said yes.
  https://github.com/tendermint/spec/pull/71#discussion_r374210533

### Figuring out if malicious behaviour is immediately slashable

> Let's say H1 was committed on the main chain. Intersect validator sets of H1

Reviewer 3: What is "main chain"? Will a full node know that H1 was committed on the "main" chain? The full node sees two headers at same height, H1 and H2. It could check its state and see that it has one, let's say H1. H2 may indicate either a full-fork or a light-fork but I don't think the full node can distinguish. 
Maybe "the full node's chain" or something along those lines.

Author: > What is "main chain"

the longest branch in Bitcoin, the branch 2/3+ of vals voted for in Tendermint (note: can be a fork if >= 1/3+ are malicious).

> Will a full node know that H1 was committed on the "main" chain?

if there is an actual fork (chain split), full node may follow either one or another branch. It's supposed to halt if it notices the full fork. So both H1 or H2 can be considered committed on the main chain depending on which branch the full node is following.

> H2 may indicate either a full-fork or a light-fork but I don't think the full node can distinguish.

It can because it knows more than the light client (app state for example).

and H2.

* if there are signers(H2) that are not part of validators(H1), they misbehaved as
they are signing protocol messages in heights they are not validators =>

> immediately slashable (#F4).

Reviewer 3: Here also I don't understand. I looked back at the fork accountability spec a bit and it is not clear there to me either. What if there is a case of full-fork on chain where validator set diverged and some honest validators un-bonded on one branch. I think the phantom scenario is for the case where we can tell with certainty that H1 is from the canonical chain and H2 is from a soft-fork...but not clear to me how a full node can determine this by just looking at H1 and H2.

Author: > What if there is a case of full-fork on chain where validator set diverged and some honest validators un-bonded on one branch.

Then we'll punish them on our chain for voting on the forked chain.

Author: > validator set diverged

note this can only happen with 2/3+ of malicious validators

* if `H1.Round == H2.Round`, and some signers signed different precommit
messages in both commits, then it is an equivocation misbehavior => immediately
slashable (#F1).

* if `H1.Round != H2.Round` we need to run full detection procedure => not
immediately slashable.

* if `ValidatorsHash`, `NextValidatorsHash`, `ConsensusHash`,
`AppHash`, and `LastResultsHash` in H2 are different (incorrect application
state transition), then it is a lunatic misbehavior => immediately slashable (#F5).

If evidence is not immediately slashable, fork accountability needs to invoked
(ADR does not yet exist).

It's unclear if we should further break up `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` or
gossip and commit it directly. See
https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4182#issuecomment-590339233

> If we'd go without breaking evidence, all we'll need to do is to strip the

Reviewer 2: are there any benefits other than some simplicity to this approach? Seems like breaking evidence into different types may provide more benefits

Author: > Seems like breaking evidence into different types may provide more benefits

I don't see any benefits in doing so.

Reviewer 4: From my very limited understanding the evidence receiver should be able to determine the type of misbehaviour from `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` alone. If the sender were to break the evidence up, the receiver would still have to verify the evidence, thus breaking it up does not simplify the implementation. On the other hand, keeping `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` does simplify the protocol.

It appears the only reason for breaking it up is to reduce a DoS vector, i.e. for performance reasons. I believe the typical amount of data is small, on the order of kilobytes, and can be managed by request size limits. What is the cost of verifying the evidence and slashing, in terms of CPU time and real time? How much is saved by submitting evidence for a single validator instead?

Reviewer: But in the case of breaking up the evidence, the receiver does not need to examine every type of attack, only the one being passed to it. For example, the node knows that it just needs to look for duplicate votes and not for a phantom validator. 

It could also be possible to batch them all at once i.e.
```
type PhantomValidatorsEvidence struct {
    PubKeys []crypto.PubKey
    Vote  types.Vote
}
```

Reviewer 4: Does that actually save anything though? The logic for evidence detection has to be in there anyway, and I'd guess running it is not very costly?

Reviewer: Yes the evidence detection is already there and maybe you're right in that it wouldn't be too costly to run

committed header from `ConflictingHeadersEvidence` (H1) and leave only the

> uncommitted header (H2):

Reviewer 3: Does the light client "remember" where it got the headers from? If H1 came from FN1 and H2 from FN2 the client submits evidence to both?

Author: to both

Author: here we're talking about a full node, not the light client! a full node needs to strip committed header (from it's perspective) and send only "malicious" header to other nodes.
